The legal argument totally essentialized
gender in really old-fashioned kinds of
ways that I think were contrary to the spirit
of the project. Like, it’s different if you
have a bunch of middle-class ladies who are
at the Y[MCA] or something, in the shower,
and then a man comes in. Okay. Well, they’re
going to feel threatened by that. But the Pussy
Palace didn’t try and draw rigid gender lines.
Thepresence of trans bodies was not really, you know,
part of the discussion. It really became a, kind
of, women’s privacy. Women were at this place.
They had a reasonable expectation of privacy. Five
male police officers shouldn’t be able to barge in
and see them in various states of undress. That
was really the focus. And the thing is, it was
successful. It worked.
There was potential for amore radical
argument to be made in public. Plus,
I was a professor of Criminology, but I was
also the only person in Canada who had ever
done empirical research on liquor licensing. So,
I knew a lot about liquor licensing law. I knew
that the police generally don’t enforce. And if
they do it, they do it usually for other reasons
because the licensing laws give them an excuse to
go in somewhere without a warrant. Often wish that
I’d been able to get that kind of expertise a bit
more in front of the judge because then, the women
from the Pussy Palace wouldn’t have had to feel
awkward being pushed into this gender essentialist
argument about, “Oh, women shouldn’t be subject
to the male gaze of male police officers,” which I
always thought was, like... You know, a completely
bullshit argument for them specifically to make.
This is where I, you know, I toggle between being
a critical scholar and a practical lawyer. The
question is, did you want the two people who were
charged to get acquitted? Or did you want this
to be a broader political, something? And so, if
you want it to be a broader political something,
then you might do a different strategy. If
you want them to be acquitted, then this is
what works. And so, they went with, you know, a
strategy that works. And this is the problem with
law more generally. You know, you make strategic
choices in law about what is more likely to result
in an acquittal versus the kind of arguments that
you might want to make as a social and political
movement. And those two things are often not
completely unconnected.
The thing about queer is...
Doesn’t lend itself very well towinning
in court. So, it’s probably true that
Frank Addario chose the most winning strategy.
Okay, fine, but what are the subsequent effects?
He could’ve done a much better job if he had
sat and listened and appreciated the difference
between queer identities and traditional women’s
identities. You know? [laughs] And then he could’ve
defined the harm of the police raid not as men
ogling women, but as a police abuse of power,
regardless of the gender of anyone there or their,
you know, sexual preferences or anything of the
sort. The system could accommodate outrage about
men ogling women who were almost naked. That fits
into the system. But the queer project,
that youcouldn’t really do.
The choices you make in terms
of your litigation strategy can, you know, really
have an impact in the long term on, sort of, the
broader movement. Having said that, I’m not sure
it really happened here because the charges were
ultimately dismissed, and they were ultimately
successful going in front of the Human Rights
Commission and actually getting damages. And I
think that, that was actually a really great... A
great moment. Slapping the police on the knuckles
to say, you know, not only was it, you know,
not a good search and seizure, but actually, you
violated these people’s human rights.
But it was a disappointing way of winning. And one thing I’ve
learned studying feminist litigation, how you win
a case is important, not whether you win it or
not, for future purposes. You can win a case,
and then the lawyer goes home happy because he won
his case and he can tell his buddies, “Oh, I won
in court today,” but down the road, that argument
or that judge’s decision may be bad for other
people and other things that you also want to
promote, and of course the lawyer isn’t going to
be there at that point.
It was a very calculatedstrategy that just
focused on, “how do we best get
these folks acquitted?” That wouldn’t have been
the strategy if it was about, “Let’s show how
queer this space was.” It’s this problematic thing
that, you know, sometimes the winning argument
isn’t always going to be the best argument.
The women of the Pussy Palace were trying to do
something that was before its time in a way, ahead
of its time. They were very brave, and it’s no
wonder that it would’ve been really difficult to
find a hook in the legal apparatus for their view.